[Protocol Change] SPEC change proposal for managed-commits (#2614)
delta-io/delta: protocol_rfcs/managed-commits.md

# Managed Commits
**Associated Github issue for discussions: https://github.com/delta-io/delta/issues/2598**

This RFC proposes a new table feature `managedCommits` which changes the way Delta Lake manages commits.

> Today’s Delta commit protocol relies on the filesystem to provide commit atomicity. This feature request is to allow delta tables which gets commit atomicity using an external commit-owner and not

Reviewer: No change in latest PR version?

the filesystem (s3, abfs etc). This allows us to deal with various limitations of delta:

1. No reliable way for the table's owner to participate in commits.
    - The table's owner (such as a catalog) cannot reliably stay in sync with the table state, nor reject commit attempts it wouldn’t like, because it doesn’t even know about writes until they are already durable (and visible to readers).
    - No clear path to transactions that could span multiple tables and/or involve catalog updates, because filesystem commits cannot be made conditionally or atomically.
2. No way to tie commit ownership to a table.
    - In general, Delta tables have no way to advertise that they are managed by catalog or LogStore X (at endpoint Y)
    - There is no central entity that needs to be contacted in order to commit to the table. So if the underlying file system is missing _putIfAbsent_ semantics, then there is no way to ensure that a commit is atomic, which could lead

>       to lost writes when concurrent writers are writing to the table.

Reviewer: (should we update the wording to reflect that?)

--------

> ***Change to existing section***

### Delta Log Entries
Delta files are stored as JSON in a directory at the root of the table named `_delta_log`, and together with checkpoints make up the log of all changes that have occurred to a table. They are the unit of atomicity for a table.

**Note:** If [managed commits](#managed-commits) table feature is enabled on the table, recently committed delta files may reside in the `_delta_log/_commits` directory. Delta clients have to contact

> the corresponding commit-owner of the table in order to find the information about the [un-backfilled commits](#commit-backfills).

Author: Yes it was creating confusion as we are trying to simulate a diff. So now this just reflects final state of this section. i.e. how it looks now.

> the corresponding commit-owner of the table in order to find the information about the [un-backfilled commits](#commit-backfills).

Reviewer: That makes it hard to review for _changes_ tho... for example, the old text said something about commit files being the "unit of atomicity" for the table, and that's completely gone in this version. But nothing actually identifies that change. 

I did notice that mixing lots of <ins>insertions</ins> and ~deletions~ in the same text is hard to read, and it will often be better to just put full before/after versions, e.g. 

~Delta files are the unit of atomicity for a table, and are named using the next available version number, zero-padded to 20 digits.~

<ins>The delta files in `_delta_log` directory are named using the next available version number, zero-padded to 20 digits.</ins>

But any time we're reviewing markdown changes, it's important to View File, to see how it actually renders instead of trying to guess from the raw text:
![image](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/assets/79601771/64a38241-d629-4047-af9a-d4e859657a78)

> the corresponding commit-owner of the table in order to find the information about the [un-backfilled commits](#commit-backfills).

Author: fixed.

For example:

```
./_delta_log/_commits/00000000000000000000.3a0d65cd-4056-49b8-937b-95f9e3ee90e5.json
./_delta_log/_commits/00000000000000000001.7d17ac10-5cc3-401b-bd1a-9c82dd2ea032.json
./_delta_log/_commits/00000000000000000001.016ae953-37a9-438e-8683-9a9a4a79a395.json
./_delta_log/_commits/00000000000000000002.3ae45b72-24e1-865a-a211-34987ae02f2a.json
```

The delta files in `_delta_log/_commits` directory may not be committed and should not be trusted. The [commit-owner](#commit-owner) is the source of truth
for the information around which one of these are valid. Refer to [managed commits](#managed-commits) for more details.

Delta files use new-line delimited JSON format, where every action is stored as a single line JSON document.
A delta file, corresponding to version `n`, contains an atomic set of [_actions_](#Actions) that should be applied to the previous table state, corresponding to `n-1`, in order to construct the `n`th snapshot of the table.
An action changes one aspect of the table's state, for example, adding or removing a file.

> > ***New Section***

Author: Adding reference:

> ***The next set of sections will be added to the existing spec just before [Iceberg Compatibility V1](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#iceberg-compatibility-v1) section***

   commits to that table. It writes the actions in a [delta file](#delta-log-entries) and atomically makes
   this file part of the table. Refer to [commit protocol](#commit protocol) section for details around how
   the commit-owner performs commits.
3. In case of no conflict, the [commit-owner](#commit-owner) responds with success to the delta client.
4. Delta clients could contact the commit-owner to get the information about the commits on the delta table.

Essentially the [managed-commits](#managed-commits) table feature defines the overall [commit protocol](#commit-protocol) (e.g. atomicity requirements, backfills, etc), and the
commit-owner is responsible to implement that protocol.

## Commit Owner

A commit-owner is an external entity which manages the commits on a delta table. It could be backed by a database, a file system, or any other storage system. Each commit-owner has its own spec around how they should be contacted and how they do a commit.

## Commit Files

A commit file is a [delta file](#delta-log-entries) that contains the actions that are committed / need to be committed.

There are two types of commit files:

> 1. **Un-backfilled commit files**: These reside in the `_delta_log/_commits` directory.

Author: The backfilled and un-backfilled terminology seems very explicit and clear as compared to recent commit -- although it is more technical. For now, keeping it to "[un]backfill". Will revisit this when converting RFC to Protocol.

involve a server-side component (which the client-side component would be responsible to communicate with). The Delta client is responsible to define the client-side API that commit-owners should target, and commit-owners
are responsible to define the commit atomicity and backfill protocols which the commit-owner client should implement.

At a high level, the `commit-owner` needs to provide:
- API to atomically commit a version `x` with given set of `actions`. This is explained in detail in the [commit protocol](#commit-protocol) section.
- API to retrieve information about the recent commits on the table. This is explained in detail in the [getting un-backfilled commits from commit-owner](#getting-un-backfilled-commits-from-commit-owner) section.

### Commit Protocol

When a `commit-owner` receives a request to commit version `v`, it must first verify that the previous version `v-1` already exists, and that version `v` does not yet exist. It then has following choices to publish the commit:
1. Write the actions to an 'un-backfilled' [commit file](#commit-files) in the `_delta_log/_commits` directory, and **atomically** record that the new file now corresponds to version `v`.

> 2. Atomically write a backfilled [commit file](#commit-files) in the `_delta_log` directory. Note that the commit will be considered to have succeeded as soon as the file becomes visible to

Author: `Write the delta file to the _delta_log/_commits directory` , `Atomically write the delta file to the _delta_log directory` implicitly assumes that the file inside _commits directory must have UUID while files inside `_delta_log` won't have UUID. This is true but it might be better to explicitly mention this by using backfill/un-backfilled commit words?

## Sample Commit Owner API

The following is an example of a possible commit-owner API which some Java-based Delta client might require commit-owner implementations to target:

```java

interface CommitStore {
    /**
     * Commits the given set of `actions` to the given commit `version`.
     *
     * @param version The version we want to commit.
     * @param actions Actions that need to be committed.
     *
     * returns CommitResponse which has details around the new committed delta file.
     */
    def commit(
        version: Long,
        actions: Iterator[String]): CommitResponse

    /**
     * API to get the un-backfilled commits for the table represented by the given `tablePath` after
     * the given `startVersion`. The returned commits are contiguous and in ascending version order.
     * Note that the first version returned by this API may not be equal to the `startVersion`. This
     * happens when few versions starting from `startVersion` are already backfilled and so
     * CommitStore may have stopped tracking them.
     *
     * @return a list of `Commit` which are tracked by commit-owner.
     *
     */

>     def getCommits(startVersion: Long): Seq[Commit]

Author: Yes agreed that it is better to put endVersion in the example API definition. done.

With the help of backfilling, the [delta files](#delta-log-entries) are visible even to the filesystem based Delta clients that do not
understand `managed-commits`. Backfill also allows the commit-owner to reduce the number of commits it must track internally.

Backfill must be sequential. In other words, a commit-owner must ensure that backfill of commit `v-1` is complete before initiating backfill of commit 'v'.

`commit-owner`s are encouraged to backfill the commits frequently. This has several advantages:
1. Filesystem-based Delta implementations may only understand backfilled commits, and frequent backfill allows them to access the most recent table snapshots.
2. Frequent backfilling minimizes the chance of data loss in case the `commit-owner` loses its state due to some failover/issue.
3. Some maintenance operations (such as checkpoints, log compaction, and metadata cleanup) can be performed only on the backfilled part of the table. Refer to the [Maintenance operations on managed-commit tables](#maintenance-operations-on-managed-commit-tables) section for more details.

> The commit-owner may also expose an API to backfill the commits. This will allow clients to ask the commit-owner to backfill the commits if needed in order to do some maintenance operations.

Author: Rephrased this to:

> The commit-owner also needs to expose an API to backfill the commits. This will allow clients to ask the commit-owner to backfill the commits if needed in order to do some maintenance operations.

  8  -> "00000000000000000008.7d17ac10-5cc3-401b-bd1a-9c82dd2ea032.json",
  9  -> "00000000000000000009.41bf693a-f5b9-4478-9434-af7475d5a9f0.json"
}
```

Delta clients have two choices to read such tables:
1. A non-managed-commit aware delta implementation can read such table by listing the `_delta_log` directory and reading the delta/checkpoint/log-compaction files.
   They cannot use the un-backfilled commits in `_delta_log/_commits` directory as they are not aware of the external commit-owner. Because of this, they may see a stale snapshot
   of the table if the recent commits are not backfilled.
    - In the above example, such delta implementation will see version 7 as the latest snapshot.
2. A client that understands managed commits can supplement the file listing result by contacting the commit-owner for information about un-backfilled commits, in order to get the most
   recent snapshot of the table.
    - In the above example, a delta implementation could get information about versions 0 through 7 from _delta_log directory and get information about un-backfilled commits (v8, v9) from the commit-owner.

## Maintenance operations on managed-commit tables

> Maintenance operations such as [checkpoints](#checkpoints-1), [log compaction](#log-compaction-files), [metadata cleanup](#metadata-cleanup) can be performed only on the backfilled part of a managed-commit table.
> 
> - A [checkpoint](#checkpoints-1) for a version `v` can be created only if the commit `v` is already backfilled i.e. `_delta_log/<v>.json` exists.
> - A [log compaction](#log-compaction-files) can be done only on the backfilled part of the table. The log compaction file `<x>.<y>.compacted.json` can be created only if commit `y` is already backfilled i.e. `_delta_log/<y>.json` exists.
> - A [Metadata cleanup](#metadata-cleanup) must always preserve the newest k >= 1 backfilled commits. In other words, [metadata cleanup](#metadata-cleanup) must always choose a backfilled `cutOffCheckpoint`.
>     - This allows the table to remain discoverable by the filesystem-based delta readers even after metadata cleanup deletes everything before commit version `cutOffCheckpoint`.

Reviewer: This seems bulky/redundant... maybe
```suggestion
[Checkpoints](#checkpoints-1) and [log compaction files](#log-compaction-files) can only be created for commits in the `_delta_log` directory. In other words, in order to checkpoint version `v` or produce a compacted log file for commit range x <= v <= y, `_delta_log/<v>.json` must exist. Otherwise, filesystem-based readers who encountered the seemingly-extra files might think the table metadata was corrupted.

[Metadata cleanup](#metadata-cleanup) must not delete the newest commit in the `_delta_log` directory. In other words, if the cutoff checkpoint version is `v`, then `_delta_log/<v>.json` must exist. Otherwise, the table would appear deleted/empty to filesystem-based readers.
```

Reviewer: Actually: I'm not sure we need to say much (anything?) about metadata cleanup, because the newest checkpoint always corresponds to a backfilled commit, and we never delete the newest checkpoint? 

Also -- The current [metadata cleanup](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#metadata-cleanup) spec doesn't say so, but it's implied that metadata cleanup can only proceed if a checkpoint can be found. Maybe we should say that directly?

Author: Makes sense. Adding following line to metadata cleanup:

2. Identify the newest checkpoint that is not newer than the `cutOffCommit`. A checkpoint at the `cutOffCommit` is ideal, but an older one will do. Lets call it `cutOffCheckpoint`.
   We need to preserve the `cutOffCheckpoint` and all commits after it, because we need them to enable
   time travel for commits between `cutOffCheckpoint` and the next available checkpoint.
   - **If no checkpoint can be found, do not proceed with metadata cleanup as there is nothing to cleanup.**

Added Metadata Cleanup section also in the RFC.

## Managed Commit Enablement

The managed-commit feature is supported and active when:
- The table must be on Writer Version 7.
- The table has a `protocol` action with `writerFeatures` containing the feature `managedCommits`.
- The table has a metadata property `delta.managedCommitOwnerName` in the [change-metadata](#change-metadata)'s configuration.

> - The table may have a metadata property `delta.managedCommitOwnerConf` in the [change-metadata](#change-metadata)'s configuration. The value of this property is a json-coded string-to-string map.

Reviewer: Should we do some namespacing here, with e.g. `delta.managedCommits.commitOwner` and `delta.managedCommits.commitOwnerConf`?

    - A commit-owner can store additional information (e.g. configuration information such as service endpoints) in this field, for use by the commit-owner client (it is opaque to the Delta client).

Note that a table is in invalid state if the change-metadata contains the `delta.managedCommitOwnerName` property but the table does not have the `managedCommits` feature in the `protocol` action or vice versa.

E.g.
```json
{
  "metaData":{
    "id":"af23c9d7-fff1-4a5a-a2c8-55c59bd782aa",
    "format":{"provider":"parquet","options":{}},
    "schemaString":"...",
    "partitionColumns":[],
    "configuration":{
      "appendOnly": "true",
      "delta.managedCommitOwnerName": "commit-owner-1",

>       "delta.managedCommitOwnerConf": "{\"batchSize\":\"10\",\"endpoint\":\"http://sample-url.com/commit\"}"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "delta.managedCommitOwnerConf": "{\"endpoint\":\"http://sample-url.com/commit\", \"authenticationMode\":\"oauth2\"}"
```
(no idea what "batchSize" might mean, and probably not worth the confusion just for an example)

Reviewer: Also, somewhere we should say that the commit owner conf should never include secrets such as auth tokens or credentials, because any reader with access to the table's storage location can see them.

Author: Added this in `Managed Commit Enablement` section where we describe the table property.

    }
  }
}
```

## Writer Requirements for Managed Commits

When supported and active:

> - Require that `inCommitTimestamp` table feature must be supported and active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `inCommitTimestamp` table feature must also be supported and active.
```
(we should eventually link to that feature's section of the spec -- but I realize that it's not yet in the spec to link to)

> - Writer must do commits via the commit-owner's commit protocol and it must not write the backfilled commit files directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Writer must follow the commit-owner's commit protocol and must not perform filesystem-based commits.
```

> - Writer must not write checkpoints or log compaction files for the commits that are not backfilled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Writer must only create checkpoints or log compaction files for commits in the `_delta_log` directory.
```

# Managed Commits
**Associated Github issue for discussions: https://github.com/delta-io/delta/issues/2598**

> This RFC proposes a new table feature `managedCommits` which changes the way Delta Lake manages commits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes a new table feature `managedCommits` which changes the way Delta Lake performs commits.
```

Today’s Delta commit protocol relies on the filesystem to provide commit atomicity. This feature request is to allow delta tables which gets commit atomicity using an external commit-owner and not

> the filesystem (s3, abfs etc). This allows us to deal with various limitations of delta:

Reviewer: nit: s/delta/Delta/g for cases that refer to the table format (as opposed to "delta files" which are commit .json)

     * till the latest version tracked by commit-owner.
     * The returned commits are contiguous and in ascending version order.
     * Note that the first version returned by this API may not be equal to the `startVersion`. This
     * happens when few versions starting from `startVersion` are already backfilled and so
     * CommitStore may have stopped tracking them.
     *
     * @return a list of `Commit` which are tracked by commit-owner.
     *
     */
    def getCommits(
        startVersion: Long,
        endVersion: Long): Seq[Commit]

    /**
     * API to ask the commit-owner to backfill all commits <= given `version`.
     */
    def backfillToVersion(version: Long): Unit
}
```

## Commit Backfills
Backfilling is the process of copying the un-backfilled commits i.e. `_delta_log/_commits/<version>.<uuid>.json` to `_delta_log/<version>.json`.
With the help of backfilling, the [delta files](#delta-log-entries) are visible even to the filesystem based Delta clients that do not
understand `managed-commits`. Backfill also allows the commit-owner to reduce the number of commits it must track internally.

> Backfill must be sequential. In other words, a commit-owner must ensure that backfill of commit `v-1` is complete before initiating backfill of commit 'v'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Backfill must be sequential. In other words, a commit-owner must ensure that backfill of commit `v-1` is complete before initiating backfill of commit `v`.
```

  8  -> "00000000000000000008.7d17ac10-5cc3-401b-bd1a-9c82dd2ea032.json",
  9  -> "00000000000000000009.41bf693a-f5b9-4478-9434-af7475d5a9f0.json"
}
```

Delta clients have two choices to read such tables:
1. Any Delta client can read such table by listing the `_delta_log` directory and reading the delta/checkpoint/log-compaction files.
   They cannot use the un-backfilled commits in `_delta_log/_commits` directory as they are not aware of the external commit-owner. Because of this, they may see a stale snapshot
   of the table if the recent commits are not backfilled.
    - In the above example, such delta implementation will see version 7 as the latest snapshot.
2. A client that understands managed commits can supplement the file listing result by contacting the commit-owner for information about un-backfilled commits, in order to get the most
   recent snapshot of the table.
    - In the above example, a delta implementation could get information about versions 0 through 7 from _delta_log directory and get information about un-backfilled commits (v8, v9) from the commit-owner.

## Maintenance operations on managed-commit tables

> [Checkpoints](#checkpoints-1) and [log compaction files](#log-compaction-files) can only be created for commits in the `_delta_log` directory. In other words, in order to

Reviewer: Should we also add a sentence about this to each of those sections as well? it's kind of an important detail

Author: done.

- The table may have a metadata property `delta.managedCommits.commitOwnerConf` in the [change-metadata](#change-metadata)'s configuration. The value of this property is a json-coded string-to-string map.
    - A commit-owner can store additional information (e.g. configuration information such as service endpoints) in this field, for use by the commit-owner client (it is opaque to the Delta client).
    - This field should never include secrets such as auth tokens or credentials, because any reader with access to the table's storage location can see them.

Note that a table is in invalid state if the change-metadata contains the `delta.managedCommits.commitOwner` property but the table does not have the `managedCommits` feature in the `protocol` action or vice versa.

E.g.
```json
{
  "metaData":{
    "id":"af23c9d7-fff1-4a5a-a2c8-55c59bd782aa",
    "format":{"provider":"parquet","options":{}},
    "schemaString":"...",
    "partitionColumns":[],
    "configuration":{
      "appendOnly": "true",
      "delta.managedCommits.commitOwner": "commit-owner-1",

>        "delta.managedCommits.commitOwnerConf": "{\"endpoint\":\"http://sample-url.com/commit\", \"authenticationMode\":\"oauth2\"}"

Reviewer: This line is longer than the viewbox github renders for the snippet. Maybe we should manually break the line?
```suggestion
       "delta.managedCommits.commitOwnerConf": 
           "{\"endpoint\":\"http://sample-url.com/commit\", \"authenticationMode\":\"oauth2\"}"
```

    }
  }
}
```

## Writer Requirements for Managed Commits

When supported and active:

> - The `inCommitTimestamp` table feature must also be supported and active.

Reviewer: I don't think this is explained anywhere... probably worth updating the backfill section to point out that ICT is needed because the backfilled commit will otherwise have a different timestamp than the original?

Author: Adding following text in `Commit Backfills` section:

Since commit backfills may happen at a later point in time, so the `file modification timestamp` of the backfilled file might be very different than the time of actual commit. For this reason, the `managed-commit` feature depends on another writer feature called [in-commit-timestamps](#TODO-Put-Relevant-Link) to make the commit timestamps more reliable. Refer to [Writer Requirements for Managed Commits](#writer-requirements-for-managed-commits) section for more details.

2. Identify the newest checkpoint that is not newer than the `cutOffCommit`. A checkpoint at the `cutOffCommit` is ideal, but an older one will do. Lets call it `cutOffCheckpoint`.
   We need to preserve the `cutOffCheckpoint` and all commits after it, because we need them to enable
   time travel for commits between `cutOffCheckpoint` and the next available checkpoint.
   - **If no checkpoint can be found, do not proceed with metadata cleanup as there is nothing to cleanup.**
3. Delete all [delta log entries](#delta-log-entries and [checkpoint files](#checkpoints) before the
   `cutOffCheckpoint` checkpoint. Also delete all the [log compaction files](#log-compaction-files) having
   startVersion <= `cutOffCheckpoint`'s version.
4. Now read all the available [checkpoints](#checkpoints-1) in the _delta_log directory and identify
   the corresponding [sidecar files](#sidecar-files). These sidecar files need to be protected.
5. List all the files in `_delta_log/_sidecars` directory, preserve files that are less than a day
   old (as of midnight UTC), to not break in-progress checkpoints. Also preserve the referenced sidecar files

>    identified in Step-4 above. Delete everything else.

Reviewer: It's probably enough to just show the bullet that changed, e.g.

2. Identify the newest checkpoint that is not newer than the `cutOffCommit`. A checkpoint at the `cutOffCommit` is ideal, but an older one will do. Lets call it `cutOffCheckpoint`.
   We need to preserve the `cutOffCheckpoint` and all commits after it, because we need them to enable
   time travel for commits between `cutOffCheckpoint` and the next available checkpoint.
   - <ins>If no `cutOffCheckpoint` can be found, do not proceed with metadata cleanup as there is nothing to cleanup.</ins>

        actions: Iterator[String]): CommitResponse

    /**
     * API to get the un-backfilled commits for the table represented by the given `tablePath` where
     * `startVersion` <= version <= endVersion.

>      * If endVersion is -1, then it means that we want to get all the commits starting from `startVersion`

Reviewer: Option[Long] seems better than magic values?

Author: Isn't Option more scalaish? I kept it -1 to more reflect it like a pseudo code.
No strong opinion - I can change it to Option if thats more intutive.

checkpoint version `v` or produce a compacted log file for commit range x <= v <= y, `_delta_log/<v>.json` must exist. Otherwise, filesystem-based readers who encountered
the seemingly-extra files might think the table metadata was corrupted.

## Managed Commit Enablement

The managed-commit feature is supported and active when:
- The table must be on Writer Version 7.
- The table has a `protocol` action with `writerFeatures` containing the feature `managedCommits`.
- The table has a metadata property `delta.managedCommits.commitOwner` in the [change-metadata](#change-metadata)'s configuration.
- The table may have a metadata property `delta.managedCommits.commitOwnerConf` in the [change-metadata](#change-metadata)'s configuration. The value of this property is a json-coded string-to-string map.
    - A commit-owner can store additional information (e.g. configuration information such as service endpoints) in this field, for use by the commit-owner client (it is opaque to the Delta client).
    - This field should never include secrets such as auth tokens or credentials, because any reader with access to the table's storage location can see them.

> Note that a table is in invalid state if the change-metadata contains the `delta.managedCommits.commitOwner` property but the table does not have the `managedCommits` feature in the `protocol` action or vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that a table is in invalid state if the change-metadata contains the `delta.managedCommits.commitOwner` property but the table does not have the `managedCommits` feature in the `protocol` action (or vice versa).
```
